Quickstart Guide 
===================================

This quick tutorial will guide you through the process of generating, tweaking a
terrain and furnishing it with trees. Follow the exact values in here to get a
good result, of course you can also experiment with your own.

Don't be afraid to try different things! As long as you input the same seed
value, Mirage will generate the same basic terrain shape.

.. image:: _static/quick_intro.jpg


Generating a terrain
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For this guide we'll create valley kind of scene. Let's start by finding a good
seed value.  Let's start generating random terrains using the `normal` detail
level to check the overall shape. Make sure you enable `autoseed` (the clock
icon next to the seed value). That way Mirage will use a new seed value every
time you click `Generate`.

I found a good terrain at a seed of **626198583**. This terrain has a nice drop
around the middle, and a nice peak that we can show in the background.

.. image:: _static/quick_terrain_01.jpg

Now that we have a good terrain to begin let's tweak it a little. Before doing
anything else disable `autoseed` by clicking the icon again, that way Mirage
won't change the seed anymore.

- Increase `Max height` to 3.5. This will give the valleys a little more depth.
- Lower the `Roughness` to 5. This will make the terrain smoother (since valleys
- are not that "bumpy"). Increase `Deformation` to 8. This will give it more
- ridges and, add some interesting twists.

.. image:: _static/quick_terrain_02.jpg

Next, it's time to bump up the vertex count and get some more detail in our
terrain. You may not want to do this, depending on the complexity of your scene
or whether you have a "target" vertex count.

We have two options: we can apply a `subsurf modifier` to the current terrain,
or we can re-generate it with a higher level of detail.

For this guide, I will delete the terrain and re-generate it with a `medium`
level of detail.

.. image:: _static/quick_terrain_03.jpg

Before moving on, let's look for a good camera angle. That way we know what
parts of the land will be in view and which won't. There's no need to waste time
sculpting features that no one will see.

.. image:: _static/quick_terrain_04.jpg


Tweaking and sculpting 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most of the time you will want to modify the terrain to suit your scene (or your
artistic vision) better. One method is to enter edit mode and start moving
vertices around with proportional editing enabled (pressing the :kbd:`O` key).
However this is only useful for meshes with low poly count. The best alternative
for large meshes like the one we're working on is to sculpt.

Press :kbd:`tab` and enter sculpt mode. For a simple tweak like this, I'll only
use the default brush. :kbd:`Click` to add or bump, :kbd:`CTRL-Click` to
subtract or move down and :kbd:`SHIFT-Click` to soften.

First I lowered a small bump to the left of the main peak. I wanted it to fall
more sharply so it would provide some contrast to the lower areas. Next I
increase the height of the left side, so instead of dropping down it stays at
about the same height. This improves the composition, making it look more
"stable".

.. image:: _static/quick_sculpt.jpg

This is all open to personal taste, so feel free to do it your way. In the image
above you can also see how I like to setup Blender for sculpting Terrains: one
3D View to work freely on, and another one with Camera View to check the
results.

Once you have customized the terrain to your liking it's time to update the
vertex groups. Mirage automatically created `Height` and `Slope` weight groups
when we generated the terrain. However, now that we have changed the terrain we
also have to update these groups. This is necessary for the next step, trees,
since Tree distribution uses these vertex groups for it's height and slope
settings.

To update them, look for the `Tools panel` in the Mirage tab with the terrain
selected. Then click the `Update height` and `Update slope` buttons.

Adding Trees
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mirage doesn't come with tree models or generation functions. So you'll have to
generate them using `Sapling
<http://wiki.blender.org/index.php/Extensions:2.6/Py/Scripts/Curve/Sapling_Tree>`_
or `Arbaro <http://arbaro.sourceforge.net/>`_, model them yourself, or get
models from the web.

In this case I'll be using the `Spruce Pine Tree  pack from Blending Nature
<https://cgcookiemarkets.com/all-products/blending-nature-spruce-pine-tree/?ref=32>`_

Whatever way you get the trees, make sure they are in a group. You can easily
tell if they are in a group because they will have a green outline when
selected. If they are not grouped, you can group them by selecting them and
pressing :kbd:`CTRL-G`. Move them out of camera view, or even better to the last
layer (press :kbd:`M` and click the last square).

.. image:: _static/quick_tree_01.jpg

Look for the Tree Distribution panel in the Mirage tab and set the Tree Group to
the group containing the tree objects. Set the `Density` at 500 for now. We'll
start with a small density amount to check scale and maximum height without
slowing down Blender too much.

Since my scene is a valley and some areas will be high, I've lowered the
`maximum height` to 40%. If you're going for extreme realism, you might want to
look up the height range for the different tree species you plan to use.

I also increased the maximum slope to 60ยบ to cover a bit more ground.

The proper scale for my terrain and tree models is 0.1. You can use the
automatic scale setting (Lock to terrain scale) to help you figure out the best
scale for your models.

.. image:: _static/quick_tree_02.jpg

Once we have everything else set it's time to increase the density to the final
level. That will be around 50,000 for my scene. If you set this from the Tree
Distribution panel, Mirage will automatically set the display to *Cross* for the
viewport. The viewport can't handle too much geometry currently, and showing
thousands of trees with a million or so vertex each will slow Blender down to a
crawl (if not crash it).

.. image:: _static/quick_tree_03.jpg

The `Tree Density` vertex group controls the distribution of trees. Once you've
generated the trees, you can tweak that group to optimize the distribution. For
instance you can paint all the areas that are outside of the camera view so you
don't waste resources on particles out of view from the camera. Keep in mind
you'll have to reduce the number of particles in the particle system. Don't use
the Tree Distribution panel to do this, as it will overwrite your customized
vertex group!


A note on materials
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As we saw in the sculpting section, Mirage can create and keep updated vertex
groups for the terrain. That also includes color vertex groups that you can use
in Cycles to make materials that can change depending the height and slope.

In the nodes editor, bring up the add node menu (:kbd:`shift-a`) and look for
the `Input > Vertex Color` submenu. You'll find the groups there. You might also
want to use a color ramp node to control them better.

.. image:: _static/quick_material.png

When **UV Unwrapping** it's useful to remember the terrain is essentially a
grid. That means it can be unwrapped into a grid. To do this, first go into
orthogonal top view (press :kbd:`5` and then :kbd:`7`). Now go into edit mode,
and press  :kbd:`u` to bring the unwrap menu. From the menu select  
`Project From View (Bounds)`. Now you have a grid-like UV that you can tweak to
your liking. Note that there will be some stretching in along the slopes.

Another option is to use `Smart UV Project`. This option will give you less 
stretching, but it will also create more islands and be more irregular.

That concludes this guide. If you want to know more about all the settings
please refer to the other sections of this manual. I hope you have found this
quick intro useful, and are on your way to making  breathtaking landscapes with
Mirage!

If you need help with anything contact me at diego@sinestesia.co (Spanish,
English), or using the `Blender Market's support forums
<https://cgcookiemarkets.com/all-products/mirage/?view=support?ref=32>`_
